---
layout: post
title: Elections for a new Board of Directors
joomla_id: 39
joomla_url: elections-for-a-new-board-of-directors
date: 2007-07-30 11:25:51.000000000 -06:00
---
<pre>Hi all, it's time to have another election for the Board of Directors.<br /><br />The first step is to have nominations.  These take place on the<br />emc-users list.  To make a nomination, please put NOMINATION in the<br />subject of your message.  Nominations must be seconded by another<br />person to be considered; to second a nomination please put SECONDED in<br />the subject.  The nominated person should then accept or decline the<br />nomination.<br /><br /><a target="_top" href="http://wiki.linuxcnc.org/cgi-bin/emcinfo.pl?BoardElection" /></pre><pre>Let's start nominations now and run them through July 31 2007,<br />23:59:59 UTC.<br /><br />Like last time, we'll have a wiki page where the nominees can write<br />a bit about their experience and goals if they like:<br /><br /><a target="_top" href="http://wiki.linuxcnc.org/cgi-bin/emcinfo.pl?BoardElection">http://wiki.linuxcnc.org/cgi-bin/emcinfo.pl?BoardElection</a><br /> <br /></pre><pre>The Board has asked Michael Cornelius to run the voting for us.<br />Michael is not involved in the EMC project but he is a Free Software<br />advocate in many ways and has graciously offered to help out.  The<br />Board will provide him a list of email addresses made from joining the<br />lists of people receiving the emc-users and emc-developers emails.<br /><br />He will send a ballot to each person and have a special email address<br />set up to receive the votes.  When voting closes he will report back<br />the names of our new Board members.  When the time comes he will give<br />us all specific instructions about how to vote.<br /><br />I wish good luck to the nominees, and give my sincere thanks to<br />everyone on the lists who will participate in setting the future<br />direction of the EMC project.</pre>
