---
layout: post
title: 'LinuxCNC 2.9.5 released'
date: 2025-09-07 23:59:00.000 +01:00
---

### LinuxCNC 2.9.5 has been released.

This is mainly a bugfix release, but includes a new modbus driver for
the Mesa UART (update/replacement for mesa_modbus with more
flexibility and configurability)

Packages for 2.9-uspace for amd64 (PC) for Debian Buster, Bullseye,
Bookworm and Trixie and for arm64 (Raspberry Pi 4/5) for Buster and
Bookworm have been added to the linuxcnc repository.
If you installed from one of our live images or Pi SD-card images then
the update should be available immediately.

If you  installed into a normally-installed Debian from the Debian
repositories then hopefully the new version can be queued up for the
next point release. If you can't wait then it is possible to add the
LinuxCNC repositories to the apt sources. One way to do this and
install the security keys is via the shell script here:
https://linuxcnc.org/docs/stable/html/getting-started/getting-linuxcnc.html#_installing_on_debian_bookworm_with_preempt_rt_kernel

At the moment the live-image installer and SD card images will install
2.9.4 but update should be trivial (and possibly automatic)

RTAI is still supported, but in the short term building from source is
likely to be the most expedient way to get 2.9.5 on that platform.

Highlights:

 * Backport new hm2_modbus driver to 2.9 branch.
 * Fix probe contact bounce triggering error during decel phase

Abridged list of other updates.

 * gmoccapy: change text to icons of undo/redo buttons to fit window size
 * tests: save.1 test removed. It's been skipped for 19 years.
 * halui: on startup, set the first configured axis as 'is-selected' instead of X
 * halui: Don't create 'halui.axis.'- pins for unconfigured axes
 * qtvcp versa probe: remember setting of auto skew/zero buttons we reopened
 * PyVCP test: result file formatting fixes (#3551)
 * stepconf -fix human input names in wrong order
 * Tests: Add a test for PyVCP - Specifically Issue #3538
 * Deprecate gantry.comp
 * Fix #3538 - "halparam" tag not working in PyVCP
 * tests: Add a test for spindle INI speed limits function
 * Fix a race; add a test to ensure the 'result' and 'stderr' files are closed before continuing to run 'checkresult'.
 * Fix command-line directories acceptance by correct expansion.
 * Fix a race between setting the signal handlers and marking hal_ready().
 * Gladevcp: Update the .ui and .glade files in the sample configs to Gtk+3.0
 * clarify documentation on stat 'gcodes' and (spindle)'speed' attributes
 * Merge pull request #3460 from Sigma1912/2.9-Fix-preview-update-not-respecting-active-wcs
 * Don't use  RS274NGC_STARTUP_CODE when updating the preview
 * Merge pull request #3454 from Sigma1912/2.9_Fix_issue_3447
 * Gmoccapy: Fix very large numbers for spindle speed and 'Vc' in the gui when using G96
 * Gmoccapy: Fix 'spindle.0.speed-out' pins being reset to wrong value when using G96
 * Split declaration/assignment with label because it is not accepted by the compiler in Debian 10 and 11.
 * Fix invalid escape sequence warnings from halcompile and hal components.
 * Fix missing parity error definition
 * Merge pull request #3412 from BsAtHome/backport_2.9_fix_update-pktuart-v3
 * Update, fix and reorganize hostmot2 PktUART to support V3.
 * debian: Updated policy standard to 4.7.2
 * orient: Commit 79c0966 had an un-noticed effect on the behaviour of M19 reported in issue #3389
 * ServoToGo: remove old weblinks that now redirect to a spam site
 * halui -fix spindle override using direct value.
 * gmoccapy: fix setting to disable "run from line"
 * halscope: set button left and right padding to 0 to allow smaller window size
 * docs: update halscope channel off function + update images
 * qtdragon_hd_vert -add a sample config for vertical layout.
 * qtvcp -qtdragon_hd_vert: add a vertical layout version
 * Merge pull request #3339 from NTULINUX/ntulinux/2.9-fixes
 * interp_o_word.cc: Insert almost-certainly-missing "breaks" addresses #3290
 * qtvcp -vismach config cleanup: gantry_5axis, millturn, vismach_fanuc_200f

The full changelog can be seen at
https://github.com/LinuxCNC/linuxcnc/blob/2.9/debian/changelog

As always, we couldn't do this without the contributions from the
community, so many thanks to:

Alec Ari
andronick83
Bertho Stultiens
CMorley
DauntlessAq
David
Hans Unzner
Petter Reinholdtsen
Rene Hopf
Sigma1912
Steffen Möller
