---
layout: post
title: 'LinuxCNC 2.9.7 released'
date: 2025-10-26 23:11:00.000 +00:00
---

### LinuxCNC 2.9.7 has been released.

This is another bug-fix release to fix an unexpected interaction in a
previous bugfix. (In this case the driver for the popular XHC pendants
was incompatible with changes made to HALUI pin creation)

In addition changes to the CI (continuous integration) in Github mean
that the install debs will be available from the LinuxCNC Github
repository under the "releases tab"

This update is for all users, but especially users of the XHC pendants
and Gmoccapy.

Packages for 2.9-uspace for amd64 (PC) and arm64 (Pi) for Debian
Buster, Bullseye,
Bookworm, Trixie and Sid have been added to the linuxcnc repository.
If you installed
from one of our live images or Pi SD-card images then the update
should be available immediately.

If you installed into a normally-installed Debian from the Debian
repositories then hopefully the new version can be queued up for the
next point release. If you can’t wait then it is possible to add the
LinuxCNC repositories to the apt sources. One way to do this and
install the security keys is via the shell script here:
https://linuxcnc.org/docs/stable/html/getting-started/getting-linuxcnc.html#_installing_on_debian_bookworm_with_preempt_rt_kernel

This script has been updated to include a new, longer key required by
Debian versions from Trixie onwards.

At the moment the live-image installer and SD card images will install
2.9.4 but update should be trivial (and possibly automatic)

RTAI is still supported, but in the short term building from source is
likely to be the most expedient way to get 2.9.7 on that platform.

## Changelog ##

  * [ci] publish releases with artifacts - GitHub now builds release debs
  * Revert 7d9ee66  to address #3583 - halui functions stop working in 2.9.5/6
  * Merge pull request #3512 from Sigma1912/patch-1
  * Gmoccapy: Fix arrow key up/down bug in tooleditor


## Acknowledgements ##

As always, we couldn’t do this without the contributions from the
community, so many thanks to:

Konstantin Tcepliaev
Sigma1912
