---
layout: post
title: 'LinuxCNC 2.9.6 released'
date: 2025-09-26 01:11:00.000 +01:00
---

### LinuxCNC 2.9.6 has been released.

This is a bug-fix release. Shortly after the release of 2.9.5 it was noticed
that a fix for a graphics bug in Gmoccapy had resulted in the Axis touch-off
dialog box no-longer working for non-zero entries. 

This update is for all users, but especially users of the Axis GUI. 

Packages for 2.9-uspace for amd64 (PC) for Debian Buster, Bullseye,
Bookworm and Trixie and for arm64 (Raspberry Pi 4/5) for Buster and
Bookworm have been added to the linuxcnc repository.
If you installed from one of our live images or Pi SD-card images then
the update should be available immediately.

If you  installed into a normally-installed Debian from the Debian
repositories then hopefully the new version can be queued up for the
next point release. If you can't wait then it is possible to add the
LinuxCNC repositories to the apt sources. One way to do this and
install the security keys is via the shell script here:
https://linuxcnc.org/docs/stable/html/getting-started/getting-linuxcnc.html#_installing_on_debian_bookworm_with_preempt_rt_kernel

At the moment the live-image installer and SD card images will install
2.9.4 but update should be trivial (and possibly automatic)

RTAI is still supported, but in the short term building from source is
likely to be the most expedient way to get 2.9.6 on that platform.

## Changelog ##

  * qtvcp -Qt5_graphics: issue 2753; preview wrongly uses INI startup code
  * Merge pull request #3567 from Sigma1912/2_9-Correct_bad_fix_for_2753
  * Gremlin: Don't use  RS274NGC_STARTUP_CODE when updating the preview
  * Docs: Address G52 Circular Link #3565

## Acknowledgements ##
As always, we couldn't do this without the contributions from the
community, so many thanks to:

CMorley
Sigma1912
